TALKSUMM: A Dataset and Scalable Annotation Method for Scientific Paper Summarization Based on Conference Talks
Currently, no large-scale training data is available for the task of scientific paper summarization. In this paper, we propose a novel method that automatically generates summaries for scientific papers, by utilizing videos of talks at scientific conferences. We hypothesize that such talks constitute a coherent and concise description of the papers’ content, and can form the basis for good summaries. We collected 1716 papers and their corresponding videos, and created a dataset of paper summaries. A model trained on this dataset achieves similar performance as models trained on a dataset of summaries created manually. In addition, we validated the quality of our summaries by human experts.
1 Introduction
The rate of publications of scientific papers is
increasing and it is almost impossible for re-
searchers to keep up with relevant research. Au-
tomatic text summarization could help mitigate
this problem. In general, there are two com-
mon approaches to summarizing scientific papers:
citations-based, based on a set of citation sen-
tences (Nakov et al., 2004; Abu-Jbara and Radev,
2011; Yasunaga et al., 2019), and content-based,
based on the paper itself (Collins et al., 2017;
Nikola Nikolov and Hahnloser, 2018). Automatic
summarization is studied exhaustively for the
news domain (Cheng and Lapata, 2016; See et al.,
2017), while summarization of scientific papers is
less studied, mainly due to the lack of large-scale
training data. The papers’ length and complexity
require substantial summarization effort from ex-
perts. Several methods were suggested to reduce
these efforts (Yasunaga et al., 2019; Collins et al.,
2017), still they are not scalable as they require
human annotations. ∗ The authors contributed equally.
Recently, academic conferences started publishing videos of talks (e.g., ACL1, EMNLP1, ICML2,
and more). In such talks, the presenter (usually
a co-author) must describe their paper coherently
and concisely (since there is a time limit), provid-
ing a good basis for generating summaries. Based
on this idea, in this paper, we propose a new
method, named TALKSUMM (acronym for Talk-
based Summarization), to automatically generate
extractive content-based summaries for scientific
papers based on video talks. Our approach uti-
lizes the transcripts of video content of conference
talks, and treat them as spoken summaries of pa-
pers. Then, using unsupervised alignment algo-
rithms, we map the transcripts to the correspond-
ing papers’ text, and create extractive summaries.
Table 1 gives an example of an alignment between
1vimeo.com/aclweb 2 icml.cc/Conferences/2017/Videos
a paper and its talk transcript (see Table 3 in the
appendix for a complete example).
Summaries generated with our approach can
then be used to train more complex and data-
demanding summarization models. Although our
summaries may be noisy (as they are created auto-
matically from transcripts), our dataset can easily
grow in size as more conference videos are aggre-
gated. Moreover, our approach can generate sum-
maries of various lengths.
Our main contributions are as follows: (1) we
propose a new approach to automatically gener-
ate summaries for scientific papers based on video
talks; (2) we create a new dataset, that contains
1716 summaries for papers from several computer science conferences, that can be used as training
data; (3) we show both automatic and human eval-
uations for our approach. We make our dataset and related code publicly available3. To our knowl-
edge, this is the first approach to automatically cre-
ate extractive summaries for scientific papers by
utilizing the videos of conference talks.
2 Related Work
Several works focused on generating train-
ing data for scientific paper summariza-
tion (Yasunaga et al., 2019; Jaidka et al., 2018;
Collins et al., 2017; Cohan and Goharian, 2018).
Most prominently, the CL-SciSumm shared
tasks (Jaidka et al., 2016, 2018) provide a total of
40 human generated summaries; there, a citations-
based approach is used, where experts first read
citation sentences (citances) that reference the
paper being summarized, and then read the whole
paper. Then, they create a summary of 150 words
on average.
Recently, to mitigate annotation cost,
Yasunaga et al. (2019) proposed a method, in
which human annotators only read the abstract in
addition to citances (not reading the full paper).
Using this approach, they generated 1000 summaries, costing 600+ person-hours. Conversely,
we generate summaries, given transcripts of
conference talks, in a fully automatic manner,
and, thus, our approach is much more scalable.
Collins et al. (2017) also aimed at generating
labeled data for scientific paper summarization,
based on “highlight statements” that authors can
provide in some publication venues.
Using external data to create summaries was
3 https://github.com/levguy/talksumm
also proposed in the news domain. Wei and Gao
(2014, 2015) utilized tweets to decide which sen-
tences to extract from news article.
Finally, alignment between different modali-
ties (e.g., presentation, videos) and text was stud-
ied in different domains. Both Kan (2007) and
Bahrani and Kan (2013) studied the problem of
document to presentation alignment for schol-
arly documents. Kan (2007) focused on the the
discovery and crawling of document-presentation
pairs, and a model to align between documents to
corresponding presentations. In Bahrani and Kan
(2013) they extended previous model to include
also visual components of the slides. Align-
ing video and text was studied mainly in the
setting of enriching videos with textual infor-
mation (Bojanowski et al., 2015; Malmaud et al.,
2015; Zhu et al., 2015). Malmaud et al. (2015)
used HMM to align ASR transcripts of cook-
ing videos and recipes text for enriching videos
with instructions. Zhu et al. (2015) utilized books
to enrich videos with descriptive explanations.
Bojanowski et al. (2015) proposed to align video
and text by providing a time stamp for every sen-
tence. The main difference between these works
and ours is in the alignment being used to gener-
ate textual training data in our case, rather than to
enrich videos.
3 The TALKSUMM Dataset

3.1 Data Collection
Recently, many computer science academic asso-
ciations including ACL, ACM, IMLS and more,
have started recording talks in different confer-
ences, e.g., ACL, NAACL, EMNLP, and other co-
located workshops. A similar trend occurs in other domains such as Physics4, Biology5, etc.
In a conference, each speaker (usually a co-
author) presents their paper given a timeframe of
15-20 minutes. Thus, the talk must be coherent
and concentrate on the most important aspects of a
paper. Hence, the talk can be considered as a sum-
mary of the paper, as viewed by its authors, and
is much more comprehensive than the abstract,
which is written by the authors as well.
In this work, we focused on NLP and ML
conferences, and analyzed 1716 video talks from ACL, NAACL, EMNLP, SIGDIAL (2015-2018),
and ICML (2017-2018). We downloaded the
4www.cleoconference.org 5 igem.org/Videos/Lecture_Videos
videos and extracted the speech data. Then, via a publicly available ASR service6, we extracted
transcripts of the speech, and based on the video
metadata (e.g., title), we retrieved the correspond-
ing paper (in PDF format). We used ScienceParse7 to extract the text of the paper, and applied a
simple processing in order to filter-out some noise
(e.g. lines starting with the word “Copyright”). At
the end of this process, the text of each paper is
associated with the transcript of the corresponding
talk.
3.2 Dataset Generation
The transcript itself cannot serve as a good sum-
mary for the corresponding paper, as it constitutes
only one modality of the talk (which also consists
of slides, for example), and hence cannot stand by
itself and form a coherent written text. Thus, to
create an extractive paper summary based on the
transcript, we model the alignment between spo-
ken words and sentences in the paper, assuming
the following generative process: During the talk,
the speaker generates words for describing ver-
bally sentences from the paper, one word at each
time step. Thus, at each time step, the speaker
has a single sentence from the paper in mind, and
produces a word that constitutes a part of its ver-
bal description. Then, at the next time-step, the
speaker either stays with the same sentence, or
moves on to describing another sentence, and so
on. Thus, given the transcript, we aim to retrieve
those “source” sentences and use them as the sum-
mary. The number of words uttered to describe
each sentence can serve as importance score, in-
dicating the amount of time the speaker spent de-
scribing the sentence. This enables to control the
summary length by considering only the most im-
portant sentences up to some threshold.
We use an HMM to model the assumed genera-
tive process. The sequence of spoken words is the
output sequence. Each hidden state of the HMM
corresponds to a single paper sentence. We heuris-
tically define the HMM’s probabilities as follows.
Denote by Y (1 : T ) the spoken words, and by S(t) ∈ {1, ...,K} the paper sentence index at time-step t ∈ {1, ..., T}. Similarly to Malmaud et al. (2015), we define the emission
6 www.ibm.com/watson/services/speech-to-text/ 7 github.com/allenai/science-parse
probabilities to be:
p(Y (t) = y|S(t) = k) ∝ max w∈words(k) sim(y,w)
where words(k) is the set of words in the k’th sentence, and sim is a semantic-
similarity measure between words, based on
word-vector distance. We use pre-trained GloVe
(Pennington et al., 2014) as the semantic vector
representations for words.
As for the transition probabilities, we must
model the speaker’s behavior and the transitions
between any two sentences in the paper. This
is unlike the simpler setting in Malmaud et al.
(2015), where transition is allowed between con-
secutive sentences only. To do so, denote the en-
tries of the transition matrix by T (k, l) = p(S(t+ 1) = l|S(t) = k). We rely on the following assumptions: (1) T (k, k) (the probability of staying in the same sentence at the next time-step) is rel-
atively high. (2) There is an inverse relation be-
tween T (k, l) and |l − k|, i.e., it is more probable to move to a nearby sentence than jumping to a
farther sentence. (3) S(t + 1) > S(t) is more probable than the opposite (i.e., transition to a later
sentence is more probable than to an earlier one).
Although these assumptions do not perfectly re-
flect reality, they are a reasonable approximation
in practice.
Following these assumptions, we define the
HMM’s transition probability matrix. First, de-
fine the stay-probability as α = max(δ(1 − K T ), ǫ), where δ, ǫ ∈ (0, 1). This choice of stayprobability is inspired by Malmaud et al. (2015),
using δ to fit it to our case where transitions be-
tween any two sentences are allowed, and ǫ to
handle rare cases where K is close to, or even
larger than T . Then, for each sentence index
k ∈ {1, ...,K}, we define:
T (k, k) = α
T (k, k + j) = βk · λ j−1, j ≥ 1
T (k, k − j) = γ · βk · λ j−1, j ≥ 1
where λ, γ, βk ∈ (0, 1), λ and γ are factors reflecting assumptions (2) and (3) respectively, and for all k, βk is normalized s.t. ∑K
l=1 T (k, l) = 1. The values of λ, γ, δ and ǫ were fixed through-
out our experiments at λ = 0.75, γ = 0.5, δ = 0.33 and ǫ = 0.1. The average value of α, across all papers, was around 0.3. The values of
these parameters were determined based on eval-
uation over manually-labeled alignments between
the transcripts and the sentences of a small set of
papers.
Finally, we define the start-probabilities assum-
ing that the first spoken word must be conditioned
on a sentence from the Introduction section, hence
p(S(1)) is defined as a uniform distribution over the Introduction section’s sentences.
Note that sentences which appear in the Ab-
stract, Related Work, and Acknowledgments sec-
tions of each paper are excluded from the HMM’s
hidden states, as we observed that presenters sel-
dom refer to them.
To estimate the MAP sequence of sentences, we
apply the Viterbi algorithm. The sentences in the
obtained sequence are the candidates for the pa-
per’s summary. For each sentence s appearing in this sequence, denote by count(s) the number of time-steps in which this sentence appears. Thus,
count(s) models the number of words generated by the speaker conditioned on s, and, hence, can
be used as an importance score. Given a desired
summary length, one can draw a subset of top-
ranked sentences up to this length.
4 Experiments

4.1 Experimental Setup
Data For Evaluation We evaluate the quality
of our dataset generation method by training an
extractive summarization model, and evaluating
this model on a human-generated dataset of sci-
entific paper summaries. For this, we choose
the CL-SciSumm shared task (Jaidka et al., 2016,
2018), as this is the most established bench-
mark for scientific paper summarization. In this
dataset, experts wrote summaries of 150 words
length on average, after reading the whole paper.
The evaluation is on the same test data used by
Yasunaga et al. (2019), namely 10 examples from
CL-SciSumm 2016, and 20 examples from CL-
SciSumm 2018 as validation data.
Training Data Using the HMM importance
scores, we create four training sets, two with
fixed-length summaries (150 and 250 words), and
two with fixed ratio between summary and paper
lengths (0.3 and 0.4). We train models on each
training set, and select the model yielding the best
performance on the validation set (evaluation is
always done with generating a 150-words sum-
mary).
Summarization Model We train an extractive
summarization model on our TALKSUMM dataset,
using the extractive variant of Chen and Bansal
(2018). We test two summary generation ap-
proaches, similarly to Yasunaga et al. (2019).
First, for TALKSUMM-ONLY, we generate a 150-
words summary out of the top-ranked sentences
extracted by our trained model (sentences from the
Acknowledgments section are omitted, in case the
model extracts any). In the second approach, a
150-words summary is created by augmenting the
abstract with non-redundant sentences extracted
by our model, similarly to the “Hybrid 2” ap-
proach of Yasunaga et al. (2019). We perform
early-stopping and hyper-parameters tuning using
the validation set.
Baselines We compare our results to SCISUMM-
NET (Yasunaga et al., 2019) trained on 1000 sci-
entific papers summarized by human annotators.
As we use the same test set as in Yasunaga et al.
(2019), we directly compare their reported model
performance to ours, including their ABSTRACT
baseline which takes the abstract to be the paper’s
summary.
4.2 Results
Automatic Evaluation Table 2 summarizes the
results: both GCN CITED TEXT SPANS and
TALKSUMM-ONLY models, are not able to obtain better performance than ABSTRACT8 . However,
for the Hybrid approach, where the abstract is aug-
mented with sentences from the summaries emit-
ted by the models, our TALKSUMM-HYBRID out-
performs both GCN HYBRID 2 and ABSTRACT.
Importantly, our model, trained on automatically-
generated summaries, performs on par with mod-
els trained over SCISUMMNET, in which training
data was created manually.
8While the abstract was input to GCN CITED TEXT SPANS, it was excluded from TALKSUMM-ONLY.
Human Evaluation We conduct a human eval-
uation of our approach with support from authors
who presented their papers in conferences. As our
goal is to test more comprehensive summaries, we
generated summaries composed of 30 sentences (approximately 15% of a long paper). We randomly selected 15 presenters from our corpus and asked them to perform two tasks, given the gen-
erated summary of their paper: (1) for each sen-
tence in the summary, we asked them to indicate
whether they considered it when preparing the talk
(yes/no question); (2) we asked them to globally
evaluate the quality of the summary (1-5 scale,
ranging from very bad to excellent, 3 means good). For the sentence-level task (1), 73% of the sentences were considered while preparing the talk.
As for the global task (2), the quality of the sum-
maries was 3.73 on average, with standard deviation of 0.725. These results validate the quality of our generation method.
5 Conclusion
We propose a novel automatic method to gener-
ate training data for scientific papers summariza-
tion, based on conference talks given by authors.
We show that the a model trained on our dataset
achieves competitive results compared to models
trained on human generated summaries, and that
the dataset quality satisfies human experts. In the
future, we plan to study the effect of other video
modalities on the alignment algorithm. We hope
our method and dataset will unlock new opportu-
nities for scientific paper summarization.
A A Detailed Example
This section elaborates on the example presented
in Table 1. Table 3 extends Table 1 by showing
the manually-labeled alignment between the com-
plete text of the paper’s Introduction section, and
the corresponding transcript. Table 4 shows the
alignment obtained using the HMM. Each row in
this table corresponds to an interval of consecutive
time-steps (i.e., a sub-sequence of the transcript)
in which the same paper sentence was selected
by the Viterbi algorithm. The first column (Pa-
per Sentence) shows the selected sentences; The
second column (ASR transcript) shows the tran-
script obtained by the ASR system; The third col-
umn (Human transcript) shows the manually cor-
rected transcript, which is provided for readability
Title: Split and Rephrase: Better Evaluation and Stronger Baselines (Aharoni and Goldberg, 2018) Paper: Processing long, complex sentences is challenging. This is true either for humans in various circumstances or in NLP tasks like parsing and machine translation . An automatic system capable of breaking a complex sentence into several simple sentences that convey the same meaning is very appealing . A recent work by Narayan et al. (2017) introduced a dataset, evaluation method and baseline systems for the task, naming it Split-and Rephrase . The dataset includes 1,066,115 instances mapping a single complex sentence to a sequence of sentences that express the same meaning, together with RDF triples that describe their semantics. They considered two system setups: a text-to-text setup that does not use the accompanying RDF information, and a semantics-augmented setup that does. They report a BLEU score of 48.9 for their best text-to-text system, and of 78.7 for the best RDF-aware one. We focus on the text-to-text setup, which we find to be more challenging and more natural. We begin with vanilla SEQ2SEQ models with attention (Bahdanau et al., 2015) and reach an accuracy of 77.5 BLEU, substantially outperforming the text-to-text baseline of Narayan et al. (2017) and approaching their best RDF-aware method. However, manual inspection reveal many cases of unwanted behaviors in the resulting outputs: (1) many resulting sentences are unsupported by the input: they contain correct facts about relevant entities, but these facts were not mentioned in the input sentence; (2) some facts are repeated the same fact is mentioned in multiple output sentences; and (3) some facts are missing mentioned in the input but omitted in the output. The model learned to memorize entity-fact pairs instead of learning to split and rephrase. Indeed, feeding the model with examples containing entities alone without any facts about them causes it to output perfectly phrased but unsupported facts (Table 3). Digging further, we find that 99% of the simple sentences (more than 89% of the unique ones) in the validation and test sets also appear in the training set, which coupled with the good memorization capabilities of SEQ2SEQ models and the relatively small number of distinct simple sentences helps to explain the high BLEU score . To aid further research on the task, we propose a more challenging split of the data . We also establish a stronger baseline by extending the SEQ2SEQ approach with a copy mechanism, which was shown to be helpful in similar tasks (Gu et al., 2016; Merity et al., 2017; See et al., 2017). On the original split, our models outperform the best baseline of Narayan et al. (2017) by up to 8.68 BLEU, without using the RDF triples. On the new split, the vanilla SEQ2SEQ models break completely, while the copy-augmented models perform better. In parallel to our work, an updated version of the dataset was released (v1.0), which is larger and features a train/test split protocol which is similar to our proposal. We report results on this dataset as well. The code and data to reproduce our results are available on Github.1 We encourage future work on the split-and-rephrase task to use our new data split or the v1.0 split instead of the original one. Talk Transcript: Let’s begin with the motivation so processing long complex sentences is a hard task this is true for arguments like children people with reading disabilities second language learners but this is also true for sentence level and NLP systems for example previous work show that dependency parsers degrade performance when they’re introduced with longer and longer sentences in a similar result was shown for neural machine translation where neural machine translation systems introduced with longer sentences starting degrading performance the question rising here is can we automatically break a complex sentence into several simple ones while preserving the meaning or the semantics and this can be a useful component in NLP pipelines . For example the split and rephrase task was introduced in the last EMNLP by Narayan Gardent and Shimarina where they introduced a dataset an evaluation method and baseline models for this task. The task definition can be taking a complex sentence and breaking it into several simple ones with the same meaning . For example if you take the sentence Alan being joined NASA in nineteen sixty three where he became a member of the Apollo twelve mission along with Alfa Worden and his back a pilot and they’ve just got its commander who would like to break the sentence into four sentences which can go as Alan bean serves as a crew member of Apolo twelve Alfa Worden was the back pilot will close it was commanded by David Scott now be was selected by NASA in nineteen sixty three we can see that the task requires first identifying independence semantics units in the source sentence and then rephrasing those units into a single sentences on the target site. In this work we first show the simple neural models seem to perform very well on the original benchmark but this is only due to memorization of the training set we propose a more challenging data split for the task to discourage this memorization and we perform automatic evaluation in error analysis on the new benchmark showing that the task is still very far from being solved.
Table 3: Alignment example between a paper’s Introduction section and first 2:40 minutes of the talk’s transcript. The different colors show corresponding content between the transcript to the written paper. This is the full-text version of the example shown in Table 1.
(our model predicted the alignment based on the
raw ASR output); Finally, the forth column shows
whether our model has correctly aligned a paper
sentence with a sub-sequence of the transcript.
Rows with no values in this column correspond
to transcript sub-sequences which were not asso-
ciated with any paper sentence in the manually-
labeled alignment.
