Wireless Message Dissemination via Selective Relay over Bluetooth (MDSRoB)
This paper presents a wireless message dissemination method designed with no need to trust other users. This method utilizes modern wireless adaptors ability to broadcast device name and identification information. Using the scanning features built into Bluetooth and Wifi, messages can be exchanged via their device names. This paper outlines a method of interchanging multiple messages to discoverable and nondiscoverable devices using a user defined scanning interval method along with a response based system. By selectively relaying messages each user is in control of their involvement in the ad-hoc network.
1 INTRODUCTION
In disintermediation methods between wireless devices there are many challenges to compatibility in devices. Software API’s were not designed for this until the most recent versions of Bluetooth stacks. Also Bluetooth software stacks contain unique bugs which make it hard to ensure that all features work across devices. Wireless adapter APIs on consumer cell phones have not allowed communication directly between devices until the most recent versions. Bluetooth has allowed direct communication but requires pairing.
Pairing Bluetooth devices brings with it a security risk because a paired device can access all exposed services on a device. Pairing provides a false sense of security in that the user expects their Bluetooth headphones to only be able to receive music. Pairing with a Bluetooth headset will also allow the headset access to phonebooks and other Bluetooth services.
The goal of this project is to design an communication method that works across as many Bluetooth implementations as possible. And also to achieve this communication without
• Joseph Paul Cohen is with the Department of Computer Science at The University of Massachusetts Boston, Boston, Massachusetts, 02125. E-mail: joecohen@ieee.org
pairing or any previous interaction. As well as no special configuration of the device such as special drivers or root access.
2 RELATED WORK
The most closely related project is from 2010 called Dythr [1] and uses a method where a phone broadcasts a wifi hotspot with the SSID being the message. This method however requires root privileges on the target android phones and cannot be used by the general population. It also requires support for each devices network card which lowers the utility even more. The main use case of this work is very similar to the proposed method and a graphic from their project is shown in Figure 1.
In 2010 Huang et al. [2] proposed PhoneNet. This method uses a central server to establish links between devices connected to a wifi network and then allows devices connected on local networks to connect directly.
More recently; researchers at Standford have worked on disintermediation of social networks. Dodson et al. [3] proposed SocialKit which allows app developers to utilize social networks without devoting to a single service. This paper mentions wireless P2P networking
ar X
iv :1
30 7.
78 14
v1 [
cs .N
I] 3
0 Ju
l 2 01
3
2
but then does not clearly explain the methods used.
Stanford has a lab called Mobisocial [4] which is moving in the same direction as the ideas presented in this paper but I was unable to find a clear publication that is in the same realm as this work.
3 BLUCAT
Typical Bluetooth usage requires a paired connection to directly connect with other devices in order to establish communication between devices. To explore the extent which Bluetooth can operate without pairing a tool was created called Blucat 1 that exercises the Java Bluecove API. Blucat is based off the bluecove libraries and is designed to work on Linux, Mac, and other systems.
Bluetooth offers a Service Discovery Protocol (SDP) for unpaired/unestablished communication. Over this protocol a set a service records can be exchanged without pairing. This is exposed as a L2CAP service listening on channel 1. To explore this, Blucat was created to exercise the Java API’s available via the bluecove project.
Blucat is designed to act like netcat2 and ncat3 as well as and have scanning features similar to nmap4. There are many protocols inside Bluetooth instead of just TCP and UDP which leads to some tough design decisions.
1. http://blucat.sourceforge.net/ 2. http://netcat.sourceforge.net/ 3. http://nmap.org/ncat/ 4. http://nmap.org/
Blucat’s nmap like ability to scan and discover devices in a piconet currently uses SDP as well as brute force scan on both RFCOMM and L2CAP channels.
To examine the Service Discovery Method in Bluetooth stacks, Blucat performs a General/Unlimited Inquiry Access Code (GIAC) discovery and returns the devices found. The character limit observed for the devices tested was 248 characters long. Bluetooth stacks such as Apple OSX, GPL Bluez, and Android cache the device name which introduces lag into the device name update cycle.
$blucat devices Searching for devices 123456789000, "Nexus 7", ... 012345678900, "GT-P1010", ... 001234567890, "Android Dev Phone 1" Found 3 device(s)
Each device is queried for the RFCOMM UUID (0x0003) and the Service Name attribute (0x0100). This offers another method of data transmission but the Android Bluetooth stack does not support reading these names. Without Android support this method of data transmission cannot be used. $blucat services Listing all services Searching for services on 123456789000 Nexus 7 123456789000, "Nexus 7", "Test Service Name", .. 123456789000, "Nexus 7", "Hello world!!!", .. 123456789000, "Nexus 7", "OBEX Object Push", .. Searching for services on 012345678900 GT-P1010 012345678900, "GT-P1010", "OPP Server", .. 012345678900, "GT-P1010", "FTP Server", ..
For each service that corresponds to a RFCOMM channel, Blucat can establish a socket and map stdin, stdout and stderr from the remote Bluetooth service to the local command line.
Blucat sockets use RFCOMM by default because of it’s goal to emulate serial connections such as TCP sockets and RS-232. RFCOMM, also known as the Serial Port Profile, is already used to interact with many devices such as headsets and printers.
4 MDSROB
Wireless Message Dissemination via Selective Relay over Bluetooth facilitates a set of strings
3 contained on each relay node to be received by other relay nodes. One important restriction is that at least one relay node must have it’s Bluetooth adapter visible. Modern versions of Android allow for indefinite viability that will never timeout which make this restriction more reasonable.
The current string broadcast is basic and only includes a message with a predefined header.
JPC︸ ︷︷ ︸ header message
Here I will detail a more useful version. Which includes a message id to make referencing previous messages possible as well as compression using bzip2 and base64 encoding. Also included is a one character type value to allow messages to be encrypted using preshared keys to allow confidential dissemination of messages. The symbol | is reserved as a divider and if used in a message can be escaped with \|
MDSR︸ ︷︷ ︸ header
Type︷︸︸︷ 0 id|message︸ ︷︷ ︸
compressed/encrypted
What should also be specified in a more detailed description is a standard substitution table for common English words that would be shipped with the implementation of the protocol. This would allow a predefined optimal mapping between common words and short string codes such as “subway” → “\ sw”. Being able to consume space on each relay should increase the possible message size. The symbol \ is reserved as a escape character and if used in a message can be escaped with \\
The system overview is shown in Figure 2. The BluetoothBroadcastReceiver listens for device interaction with the Bluetooth adapter and queues every device it can glean to be
Fig. 2. MDSRoB System Overview
processed by the processing service. The processing service then records the name of these devices, which contain the message, and stores them in a database. It then proceeds to send it’s messages to the device by modifying it’s name and contacting the remote device so it’s BluetoothBroadcastReceiver is triggered to store the message.
The management GUI deals with displaying messages and setting which messages are relayed or not. A sample interaction using the prototype GUI is shown in Figure 4.First a device broadcasts two messages. The second user responds by broadcasting a response to everyone including the sender if they are in the area.
When a relay node contacts another relay node a set of steps occur. These are shown in Figure 3. First a node will trigger the process by preforming a Bluetooth discovery and causing a connection the remote relay device. Relay2 will then become aware of Relay1 and set its device name to a message and perform a UUID scan to force Relay1 to update it’s name. This
4
5 is repeated until all relayed messages are sent.
