HyperFace: A Deep Multi-task Learning Framework for Face Detection, Landmark Localization, Pose Estimation, and Gender Recognition
We present an algorithm for simultaneous face detection, landmarks localization, pose estimation and gender recognition using deep convolutional neural networks (CNN). The proposed method called, HyperFace, fuses the intermediate layers of a deep CNN using a separate CNN followed by a multi-task learning algorithm that operates on the fused features. It exploits the synergy among the tasks which boosts up their individual performances. Extensive experiments show that the proposed method is able to capture both global and local information in faces and performs significantly better than many competitive algorithms for each of these
1 INTRODUCTION
D ETECTION and analysis of faces is a challenging prob-lem in computer vision, and has been actively researched for applications such as face verification, face tracking, person identification, etc. Although recent methods based on deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) have achieved remarkable results for the face detection task [10], [35], [50], it is still difficult to obtain facial landmark locations, head pose estimates and gender information from face images containing extreme poses, illumination and resolution variations. The tasks of face detection, landmark localization, pose estimation and gender classification have generally been solved as separate problems. Recently, it has been shown that learning correlated tasks simultaneously can boost the performance of individual tasks [58] , [57], [5].
In this paper, we present a novel framework based on CNNs for simultaneous face detection, facial landmark localization, head pose estimation and gender recognition from a given image (see Figure 1). We design a CNN architecture to learn common features for these tasks and exploit the synergy among them. We exploit the fact that information contained in features is hierarchically distributed throughout the network as demonstrated in [53]. Lower layers respond to edges and corners, and hence contain better localization properties. They are more suitable for learning landmark localization and pose estimation tasks. On the other hand, higher layers are class-specific and suitable for learning complex tasks such as face detection
• R. Ranjan and R. Chellappa are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Maryland, College Park, MD, 20742. E-mail: {rranjan1,rama}@umiacs.umd.edu • V. M. Patel is with Rutgers University.
and gender recognition. It is evident that we need to make use of all the intermediate layers of a deep CNN in order to train different tasks under consideration. We refer the set of intermediate layer features as hyperfeatures. We borrow this term from [1] which uses it to denote a stack of local histograms for multilevel image coding.
Since a CNN architecture contains multiple layers with hundreds of feature maps in each layer, the overall dimension of hyperfeatures is too large to be efficient for learning multiple tasks. Moreover, the hyperfeatures must be associated in a way that they efficiently encode the features common to the multiple tasks. This can be handled using feature fusion techniques. Features fusion aims to transform the features to a common subspace where they can be combined linearly or non-linearly. Recent advances
ar X
iv :1
60 3.
01 24
9v 2
[ cs
.C V
] 1
1 M
ay 2
01 6
in deep learning have shown that CNNs are capable of estimating any complex function. Hence, we construct a separate fusion-CNN to fuse the hyperfeatures. In order to learn the tasks, we train them simultaneously using multiple loss functions. In this way, the features get better at understanding faces, which leads to improvements in the performances of individual tasks. The deep CNN combined with the fusion-CNN can be learned together end-to-end.
We also study the performance of face detection, landmarks localization, pose estimation and gender recognition using off-the-shelf Region-based CNN (R-CNN [12]) approach. Although R-CNN for face detection has been explored in DP2MFD [35], we provide a comprehensive study of all these tasks based on R-CNN. Furthermore, we study the multitask approach without fusing the intermediate layers of CNN. Detailed experiments show that multitask learning performs better compared to individual learning. Fusing the intermediate layers features provides additional performance boost. This paper makes the following contributions.
1) We propose a novel CNN architecture that performs face detection, landmarks localization, pose estimation and gender recognition by fusing the intermediate layers of the network. 2) We propose two post-processing methods: iterative region proposals and landmarks-based non-maximum suppression, which leverage the multitask information obtained from the CNN to improve the overall performance. 3) We study the performance of R-CNN based approaches
for individual tasks and the multitask approach without intermediate layer fusion. 4) We achieve new state-of-the-art performances on challenging unconstrained datasets for all of these four tasks.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews related work. Section 3 describes the proposed HyperFace framework in detail. Section 4 describes the implementation of R-CNN based approach as well as Multitask Face. Section 5 provides the results of HyperFace along with RCNN baselines on challenging datasets. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper with a brief summary and discussion.
2 RELATED WORK
One of the earlier approaches for jointly addressing the tasks of face detection, pose estimation, and landmark localization was proposed in [57] and later extended in [58]. This method is based on a mixture of trees with a shared pool of parts in the sense that every facial landmark is modeled as a part and uses global mixtures to capture the topological changes due to viewpoint changes. A joint cascade-based method was recently proposed in [5] for simultaneously detecting faces and landmark points on a given image. This method yields improved detection performance by incorporating a face alignment step in the cascade structure. Multi-task learning using CNNs has also been studied recently in [55], which learns gender and other attributes to improve landmark localization, while [13] trains a CNN for person pose
estimation and action detection, using features only from the last layer. The intermediate layer features have been used for image segmentation [14], image classification [51] and pedestrian detection [37].
Face detection: Viola-Jones detector [44] is a classic method which uses cascaded classifiers on Haar-like features to detect faces. This method provides realtime face detection, but works best for full, frontal, and well lit faces. Deformable Parts Model (DPM) [11]-based face detection methods have also been proposed in the literature where a face is essentially defined as a collection of parts [57], [32]. It has been shown that in unconstrained face detection, features like HOG or Haar wavelets do not capture the discriminative facial information at different illumination variations or poses. To overcome these limitations, various deep CNN-based face detection methods have been proposed in the literature [35], [27], [50], [10], [49]. These methods have produced state-of-the-art results on many challenging publicly available face detection datasets. Some of the other recent face detection methods include NDFaces [30], PEP-Adapt [26], and [5].
Landmark localization: Fiducial point extraction or landmark localization is one of the most important steps in face recognition. Several approaches have been proposed in the literature. These include both regression-based [4], [47], [46], [45], [21], [42] and model-based [6] , [33], [29] methods. While the former learns the shape increment given a mean initial shape, the latter trains an appearance model to predict the keypoint locations. CNN-based landmark localization methods have also been proposed in recent years [40], [55], [24] and have achieved remarkable performance. Although a lot of work has been done for localizing landmarks for frontal faces, not much attention has been given to profile faces which occur often in real world scenarios. Recent methods like PIFA [20], CLVM [16] and 3DDFA [56] have attempted the landmark localization task on faces with varying pose angles.
Pose estimation: The task of head pose estimation is to infer the orientation of person’s head relative to the camera view. It is extremely useful in face verification for matching face similarity across different orientations. However, not much research has gone into pose estimation from unconstrained images. Non-linear manifold-based methods have been proposed in [2], [15], [38] to classify face images based on pose. A survey of various head pose estimation methods is provided in [34].
Gender recognition: Previous works on gender recognition have focused on finding good discriminative features for classification. Most previous methods use one or more combination of features such as LBP, SURF, HOG or SIFT. In recent years, attribute-based methods for face recognition have gained a lot of traction. Binary classifiers were used in [25] for each attribute such as male, long hair, white etc. Different features were computed for different features and they were used to train a different SVM for each attribute. CNN-based methods have also been proposed for learning attribute-based representations in [31], [54].
3 HYPERFACE
We propose a single CNN model for simultaneous face detection, landmark localization, pose estimation and gender classification. The network architecture is deep in both vertical and horizontal directions and is shown in Figure 2. In this section, we provide a brief overview of the system and then discuss the different components in detail.
The proposed algorithm called HyperFace consists of three modules. The first one generates class independent region-proposals from the given image and scales them to 227× 227 pixels. The second module is a CNN which takes in the resized candidate regions and classifies them as face or non-face. If a region gets classified as a face, the network additionally provides facial landmarks locations, estimated head pose and gender information. The third module is a post-processing step which involves iterative region proposals and landmarks-based non-maximum suppression (NMS) to boost the face detection score and improve the performance of individual tasks.
3.1 HyperFace Architecture
We start with Alexnet [23] for image classification. The network consists of five convolutional layers along with three fully connected layers. We initialize the network with the weights of RCNN Face network trained for face detection task as described in Section 4. All the fully connected layers are removed as they encode image-classification specific information, which is not needed for pose estimation and landmark extraction. We exploit the following two observations to create our network. 1) The features in CNN are distributed hierarchically in the network. While the lower layer features are informative for landmark localization and pose estimation, the higher layer features are suitable for more complex tasks such as detection or classification [53]. 2) Learning multiple correlated tasks simultaneously builds a synergy and improves the performance of individual tasks as shown in [5], [55]. Hence, in order to simultaneously learn face detection, landmarks, pose and gender, we need to fuse the features from the intermediate layers of the network (hyperfeatures), and learn multiple tasks on top of it. Since the adjacent layers are highly correlated, we do not consider all the intermediate layers for fusion.
We fuse the max1, conv3 and pool5 layers of Alexnet, using a separate network. A naive way for fusion is directly concatenating the features. Since the feature maps for these layers have different dimensions 27×27×96, 13×13×384, 6×6×256, respectively, they cannot be concatenated directly. We therefore add conv1a and conv3a convolutional layers to pool1, conv3 layers to obtain consistent feature maps of dimensions 6×6×256 at the output. We then concatenate the output of these layers along with pool5 to form a 6×6×768 dimensional feature maps. The dimension is still quite high to train a multi-task framework. Hence, a 1 × 1 kernel convolution layer (convall) is added to reduce the dimensions [41] to 6× 6× 192. We add a fully connected layer (fcall) to convall, which outputs a 3072 dimensional feature vector. At this point, we split the network into five separate branches corresponding to the different tasks. We add fcdetection, fclandmarks, fcvisibility , fcpose and fcgender fully connected layers, each of dimension 512, to fcall. Finally, a fully
connected layer is added to each of the branch to predict the individual task labels. After every convolution or a fully connected layer, we deploy the Rectified Layer Unit (ReLU) non-linearity. We did not include any pooling operation in the fusion network as it provides local invariance which is not desired for the face landmark localization task. Taskspecific loss functions are then used to learn the weights of the network.
3.2 Training
We use AFLW [22] dataset for training the HyperFace network. It contains 25, 993 faces in 21, 997 real-world images with full pose, expression, ethnicity, age and gender variations. It provides annotations for 21 landmark points per face, along with the face bounding-box, face pose (yaw, pitch and roll) and gender information. We randomly selected 1000 images for testing, and keep the rest for training the network. Different loss functions are used for training the tasks of face detection, landmark localization, pose estimation and gender classification tasks.
Face Detection: We use the Selective Search [43] algorithm in RCNN [12] to generate region proposals for faces in an image. A region having an overlap of more than 0.5 with the ground truth bounding box is considered a positive sample (l = 1). The candidate regions with overlap less than 0.35 are treated as negative instance (l = 0). All the other regions are ignored. We use the softmax loss function given by (1) for training the face detection task.
lossD = −(1− l) · log(1− p)− l · log(p), (1)
where p is the probability that the candidate region is a face. The probability values p and 1−p are obtained from the last fully connected layer for the detection task.
Landmark Localization: We use the 21 point markups for face landmark locations as provided in the AFLW [22] dataset. Since the faces have full pose variations, some of the landmark points are invisible. The dataset provides the annotations for the visible landmarks. We consider regions with overlap greater than 0.35 with the ground truth for learning this task, while ignoring the rest. A region can be characterized by {x, y, w, h} where (x, y) are the coordinates of the center of the region and w,h are the width and height of the region respectively. Each visible landmark point is shifted with respect to the region center (x, y), and normalized by (w, h) as given by (2)
(ai, bi) = ( xi − x w , yi − y h ) . (2)
where (xi, yi)’s are the given ground truth fiducial coordinates. The (ai, bi)’s are treated as labels for training the landmark localization task using the Euclidean loss weighted by the visibility factor. The labels for landmarks which are not visible are taken to be (0, 0). The loss in predicting the landmark location is computed from (3)
lossL = 1
2N N∑ i=1 vi((x̂i − ai)2 + ((ŷi − bi)2), (3)
where (x̂i, ŷi) is the ith landmark location predicted by the network, relative to a given region, N is the total number
of landmark points (21 for AFLW [22]). The visibility factor vi is 1 if the ith landmark is visible in the candidate region, else it is 0. This implies that there is no loss corresponding to invisible points and hence they do not take part during back-propagation.
Learning Visibility: We also learn the visibility factor in order to test the presence of the predicted landmark. For a given region with overlap higher than 0.35, we use a simple Euclidean loss to train the visibility as shown in (4)
lossV = 1
N N∑ i=1 (v̂i − vi)2 , (4)
where v̂i is the predicted visibility of ith landmark. The true visibility vi is 1 if the ith landmark is visible in the candidate region, else it is 0.
Pose Estimation: We use the Euclidean loss to train the head pose estimates of roll (p1), pitch (p2) and yaw (p3). We compute the loss for a candidate region having an overlap more than 0.5 with the ground truth, from (5)
lossP = (p̂1 − p1)2 + (p̂2 − p2)2 + (p̂3 − p3)2
3 , (5)
where (p̂1, p̂2, p̂3) are the estimated pose labels. Gender Recognition: Predicting gender is a two class problem similar to face detection. For a candidate region with overlap of 0.5 with the ground truth, we compute the softmax loss given in (6)
lossG = −(1− g) · log(1− p0)− g · log(p1), (6)
where g = 0 if the gender is male, or else g = 1. Here, (p0, p1) is the two dimensional probability vector computed from the network.
The total loss is computed as the weighted sum of the five individual losses as shown in (7)
lossfull = t=5∑ t=1 λtlosst, (7)
where losst is the individual loss corresponding to the tth task. The weight parameter λt is decided based on the importance of the task in the overall loss. We choose (λD = 1, λL = 5, λV = 0.5, λP = 5, λG = 2) for our experiments. Higher weights are assigned to landmark localization and pose estimation tasks as they need spatial accuracy.
3.3 Testing
From a given test image, we first extract the candidate region proposals using [43]. For each of the regions, we predict the task labels by a forward-pass through the HyperFace network. Only regions with detection scores above a certain threshold are classified as face and processed for subsequent tasks. The predicted landmark points are scaled and shifted to the image co-ordinates using (8)
(xi, yi) = (x̂iw + x, ŷih+ y), (8)
where (x̂i, ŷi) are the predicted locations of ith landmark from the network, and {x, y, w, h} are the region parameters defined in (2). Points obtained with predicted visibility less than a certain threshold are marked invisible. The pose
labels obtained from the network are the estimated roll, pitch and yaw for the face region. The gender is assigned according to the label with maximum predicted probability.
The fact that we obtain the landmark locations along with the detections, enables us to improve the postprocessing step so that all the tasks benefit from it. We propose two novel methods: Iterative Region Proposals (IRP) and Landmarks-based Non-Maximum Suppression (L-NMS) to improve the performance.
Iterative Region Proposals (IRP): We use a fast version of Selective Search [43] which extracts around 2000 regions from an image. We call this version Fast SS. It is quite possible that some faces with poor illumination or small size fail to get captured by any candidate region with a high overlap. The network would fail to detect that face due to low score. In these situations, it is desirable to have a candidate box which precisely captures the face. Hence, we generate a new candidate bounding box from the predicted landmark points using the FaceRectCalculator provided by [22], and pass it again through the network. The new region, being more localized yields a higher detection score and the corresponding tasks output, thus increasing the recall. This procedure can be repeated (say T time), so that boxes at a given step will be more localized to faces as compared to the previous step. From our experiments, we found that the localization component saturates in just one step (T = 1), which shows the strength of the predicted landmarks. The pseudo-code of IRP is presented in Algorithm 1. The usefulness of IRP can be seen in Figure 3, which shows a low-resolution face region cropped from the top-right image in Figure 14.
Landmarks-based Non-Maximum Suppression (LNMS): The traditional approach of non-maximum suppression involves selecting the top scoring region and discarding all the other regions with overlap more than a certain threshold. This method can fail in the following two scenarios: 1) If a region corresponding to the same detected face has less
Algorithm 1 Iterative Region Proposals 1: boxes← selective search(image) 2: scores← get hyperface scores(boxes) 3: detected boxes← boxes(scores ≥ threshold) 4: new boxes← detected boxes 5: for stage = 1 to T do 6: fids← get hyperface fiducials(new boxes) 7: new boxes← FaceRectCalculator(fids) 8: deteced boxes← [deteced boxes|new boxes] 9: end 10: final scores← get hyperface scores(detected boxes)
overlap with the highest scoring region, it can be detected as a separate face. 2) The highest scoring region might not always be localized well for the face, which can create some discrepancy if two faces are close together. To overcome these issues, we perform NMS on a new region whose bounding box is defined by the boundary co-ordinates as [mini xi,mini yi,maxi xi,maxi yi] of the landmarks for the given region. In this way, the candidate regions would get close to each other, thus decreasing the ambiguity of the overlap and improving localization.
Algorithm 2 Landmarks-based NMS 1: Get detected boxes from Algorithm 1 2: fids← get hyperface fiducials(detected boxes) 3: precise boxes← [minx,miny,maxx,maxy](fids) 4: faces← nms(precise boxes, overlap) 5: for each face in faces do 6: top-k boxes← Get top-k scoring boxes 7: final fids← median(fids(top-k boxes)) 8: final pose← median(pose(top-k boxes)) 9: final gender← median(gender(top-k boxes)) 10: final visibility← median(visibility(top-k boxes)) 11: final bounding box ←
FaceRectCalculator(final fids) 12: end
We apply landmarks-based NMS to keep the top-k boxes, based on the detection scores. The detected face corresponds to the region with maximum score. The landmark points, pose estimates and gender classification scores are decided by the median of the top k boxes obtained. Hence, the predictions do not rely only on one face region, but considers the votes from top-k regions for generating the final output. From our experiments, we found that the best results are obtained with the value of k being 5. The pseudocode for L-NMS is given in Algorithm 2.
4 NETWORK ARCHITECTURES
To emphasize the importance of multitask approach and fusion of the intermediate layers of CNN, we study the performance of simpler CNNs devoid of such features. We evaluate four R-CNN-based models, one for each task of face detection, landmark localization, pose estimation and gender recognition. We also build a separate Multitask Face
model which performs multitask learning just like HyperFace, but doesn’t fuse the information from the intermediate layers. These models are described as follows:
RCNN Face: This model is used for face detection task. The network architecture is shown in Figure 4(a). For training RCNN Face, we use the region proposals from AFLW [22] training set, each associated with a face label based on the overlap with the ground truth. The loss is computed as per (1). The model parameters are initialized using the Alexnet [23] weights trained on the Imagenet dataset [7]. Once trained, the learned parameters from this network are used to initialize other models including Multitask Face and HyperFace as the standard Imagenet initialization doesn’t converge well. We also perform a linear bounding box regression to localize the face co-ordinates.
RCNN Fiducial: This model is used for locating the landmarks. The network architecture is shown in Figure 4(b). It simultaneously learns the visibility of the points to account for the invisible points at test time, and thus can be used as a standalone fiducial extractor. The loss functions for landmarks localization and visibility of points are computed using (3) and (4), respectively. Only region proposals which have an overlap> 0.5 with the ground truth bounding box are used for training. The model parameters are initialized from RCNN Face.
RCNN Pose: This model is used for head pose estimation task. The outputs of the network are roll, pitch and yaw of the face. Figure 4(c) presents the network architecture. Similar to RCNN Fiducial, only region proposals with overlap> 0.5 with the ground truth bounding box are used for training. The training loss is computed using (5).
RCNN Gender: This model is used for face gender recognition task. The network architecture is shown in Figure 4(d). It has the same training set as RCNN Fiducial and RCNN Pose. The training loss is computed using (6).
Multitask Face: Similar to HyperFace, this model is used to simultaneously detect face, localize landmarks, estimate pose and predict its gender. The only difference between Multitask Face and HyperFace is that HyperFace fuses the intermediate layers of the network whereas Multitask Face combines the tasks using the common fully connected layer at the end of the network as shown in Figure 5. Since it provides the landmarks and face score, it leverages iterative region proposals and landmark-based NMS post-processing algorithms during evaluation.
The performance of all the above models for their respective tasks are evaluated and discussed in details in Section 5.
5 EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
We evaluated the proposed HyperFace method, along with Multask Face, RCNN Face, RCNN Fiducial, RCNN Pose and RCNN Gender on six challenging datasets:
• Annotated Face in-the-Wild (AFW) [57] for evaluating face detection, landmark localization, and pose estimation tasks • Annotated Facial Landmarks in the Wild (AFLW) [22] for evaluating landmark localization and pose estimation tasks • Face Detection Dataset and Benchmark (FDDB) [18] and PASCAL faces [48] for evaluating the face detection results • Large-scale CelebFaces Attributes (CelebA) [31] and LFWA [17] for evaluating gender recognition results.
Our method was trained on randomly selected 20, 997 images from the AFLW dataset using Caffe [19]. The remaining 1000 images were used for testing.
5.1 Face Detection
We show face detection results for AFW, PASCAL and FDDB datasets. The AFW dataset [57] was collected from Flickr and the images in this dataset contain large variations in
appearance and viewpoint. In total there are 205 images with 468 faces in this dataset. The FDDB dataset [18] consists of 2,845 images containing 5,171 faces collected from news articles on the Yahoo website. This dataset is the most widely used benchmark for unconstrained face detection. The PASCAL faces dataset [48] was collected from the test set of PASCAL person layout dataset, which is a subset from PASCAL VOC [8]. This dataset contains 1335 faces from 851 images with large appearance variations. For improved face detection performance, we learn a SVM classifier on top of fcdetection features using the training splits from the FDDB dataset.
Some of the recent published methods compared in our evaluations include DP2MFD [35], Faceness [50], HeadHunter [32], JointCascade [5], CCF [49], SquaresChnFtrs5 [32], CascadeCNN [27], Structured Models [48], DDFD [10], NDPFace [30], PEP-Adapt [26], TSM [57], as well as three commercial systems Face++, Picasa and Face.com.
The precision-recall curves of different detectors corresponding to the AFW and the PASCAL faces datasets are shown in Figures 6 (a) and (b), respectively. Figure 7 compares the performance of different detectors using the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curves on the
FDDB dataset. As can be seen from these figures, HyperFace outperforms all the reported academic and commercial detectors on the AFW and PASCAL datasets, with a high mean average precision (mAP ) of 97.9% and 92.46%, respectively. The FDDB dataset is very challenging for HyperFace and any other R-CNN-based face detection methods, as the dataset contains many small and blurred faces. Firstly, few of these faces do not get included in the region proposals from selective search. Secondly, re-sizing small faces to the input size of 227 × 227 adds distortion to the face resulting in low detection score. In spite of these issues, HyperFace performance is comparable to recently published deep learning-based face detection methods such as DP2MFD [35] and Faceness [50] on the FDDB dataset 1 with mAP of 90.1%. It is interesting to note the performance differences between RCNN Face, Multitask Face and HyperFace for the face detection tasks. Figures 6, and 7 clearly show that multitask CNNs (Multitask Face and HyperFace) outperform RCNN Face by a wide margin. The boost in the performance gain is mainly due to the following two reasons. Firstly, multitask learning approach helps the network to learn improved features for face detection which is evident from their mAP values on the AFW dataset. Using just the linear bounding box regression and traditional NMS, HyperFace obtains a mAP of 94% (Figure 12) while RCNN Face achieves a mAP of 90.3%. Secondly, having landmark information associated with detection boxes makes it easier to localize the bounding box to a face, by using IRP and L-NMS algorithms. On the other hand, the HyperFace and Multitask Face perform comparably to each other for all the face detection datasets which suggests that the network doesn’t gain much by fusing intermediate layers for the face detection task.
5.2 Landmark Localization
We evaluate the performance of different landmark localization algorithms on the AFW [57] and AFLW [22] datasets. Both of these datasets contain faces with full pose variations. Some of the methods compared include Multiview Active Appearance Model-based method (Multi. AAM) [57], Constrained Local Model (CLM) [36], Oxford facial landmark detector [9], Zhu [57], FaceDPL [58], JointCascade [5],
1. http://vis-www.cs.umass.edu/fddb/results.html
CDM [52], RCPR [3], ESR [4], SDM [46] and 3DDFA [56]. Although both of these datasets provide ground truth bounding boxes, we do not use them for evaluating on HyperFace, Multitask Face and RCNN Fiducial. Instead we use the respective algorithms to detect both the face and its fiducial points. Since, the RCNN Fiducial cannot detect faces, we provide it with the detections from the HyperFace.
Figure 8 compares the performance of different landmark localization methods on the AFW dataset using the protocol defined in [58]. In this figure, (*) indicates that models that are evaluated on near frontal faces or use hand-initialization [57]. The dataset provides six keypoints for each face which are: left eye center, right eye center, nose tip, mouth left, mouth center and mouth right. We compute the error as the mean distance between the predicted and ground truth keypoints, normalized by the face size. The plots for comparison were obtained from [58].
For the AFLW dataset, we calculate the error using all the visible keypoints. For AFW, we adopt the same protocol as defined in [56]. The only difference is that our AFLW testset consists of only 1000 images with 1132 face samples, since we use the rest of the images for training. To be consistent with the protocol, we randomly create a subset of 450 samples from our testset whose absolute yaw angles within [0◦, 30◦], [30◦, 60◦] and [60◦, 90◦] are 1/3 each. Figure 9 compares the performance of different landmark localization methods. We obtain the comparison plots from [56] where the evaluations for RCPR, ESR and SDM are carried out after adapting the algorithms to face profiling. Table 1 provides the Normalized Mean Error (NME) for AFLW dataset, for each of the pose group.
As can be seen from the figures, HyperFace outperforms many recent state-of-the-art landmark localization methods including FaceDPL [58], 3DDFA [56] and SDM [46]. Table 1 shows that HyperFace performs consistently accurate over all pose angles. This clearly suggests that while most of the methods work well on frontal faces, HyperFace is able to predict landmarks for faces with full pose variations. Moreover, we find that RCNN Fiducial and Multitask Face outperforms the earlier methods as well, performing comparably to each other. The HyperFace has an advantage over them as it uses the intermediate layers for fusion. The
local information is contained well in the lower layers of CNN and becomes invariant as depth increases. Fusing the layers brings out that hidden information which boosts the performance for the landmark localization task.
5.3 Pose Estimation
We evaluate RCNN Pose, Multitask Face and HyperFace on the AFW [57] and AFLW [22] datasets for pose estimation task. The detection boxes used for evaluating the landmark localization task are used here as well for initialization. For the AFW dataset, we compare our approach with Multi. AAM [57], Multiview HoG [57], FaceDPL2 [58] and face.com. Note that multiview AAMs are initialized using the ground truth bounding boxes (denoted by *). Figure 11 shows the cumulative error distribution curves on AFW dataset. The curve provides the fraction of faces for which the estimated pose is within some error tolerance. As can be seen from the figure, the HyperFace method achieves the best performance and beats FaceDPL by a large margin. For the AFLW dataset, we do not have pose estimation evaluation for any previous method. Hence, we show the performance of our method for different pose angles: roll, pitch and yaw in Figure 10 (a), (b) and (c) respectively. It can be seen that the network is able to learn roll, and pitch information better than yaw.
The performance traits of RCNN Pose, Multitask Face and HyperFace for pose estimation task are similar to that of the landmarks localization task. RCNN Pose and Multitask Face perform comparable to each other whereas
2. Available at: http://www.ics.uci.edu/∼dramanan/software/ face/face journal.pdf
HyperFace achieves a boosted performance due to the intermediate layers fusion. It shows that tasks which rely on the structure and orientation of the face work well with features from lower layers of the CNN.
5.4 Gender Recognition
We show the gender recognition performance on CelebA [31] and LFWA [17] datasets since these datasets come with gender information. The CelebA and LFWA datasets contain labeled images selected from the CelebFaces [39] and LFW [17] datasets, respectively [31]. The CelebA dataset contains 10,000 identities and there are 200,000 images in total. The LFWA dataset has 13,233 images of 5,749 identities. We compare our approach with FaceTracer [25], PANDA-w [54], PANDA-1 [54], [28] with ANet and [31]. The gender recognition performance of different methods is reported in Table 2. On the LFWA dataset, our method outperforms PANDA [54] and FaceTracer [25], and is equal to [31]. On the CelebA dataset, our method performs comparably to [31]. Unlike [31] which uses 180, 000 images for training and validation, we only use 20, 000 images from validation set of CelebA to fine-tune the network.
Similar to the face detection task, we find that gender recognition performs better for HyperFace and Multitask Face as compared to RCNN Gender proving that learning related tasks together improves the discriminating capability of the individual tasks. Again, we do not see
much difference in the performance of Multitask Face and HyperFace suggesting intermediate layers do not contribute much for the gender recognition task.
5.5 Effect of Post-Processing
Figure 12 provides an experimental analysis of the postprocessing methods: IRP and L-NMS, on face detection task on the AFW dataset. Fast SS denotes the quick version of selective search which produces around 2000 region proposals and takes 2s per image to compute. On the other hand, Quality SS refers to its slow version which outputs more than 10, 000 region proposals consuming more than 10s for one image. The HyperFace with a linear bounding box regression and traditional NMS achieves a mAP of 94%. Just by replacing them with L-NMS provides a boost of 1.2%. In this case, bounding-box is constructed using the landmarks information rather linear regression. Additionaly, we can see from the figure that although Quality SS generates more region proposals, it performs worse than Fast SS with ierative region proposals. IRP adds 300 new regions for a typical image consuming less than 0.5s which makes it highly efficient as compared to Quality SS.
5.6 Runtime
The Hyperface method was tested on a machine with 8 cores and GTX TITAN-X GPU. The overall time taken to perform all the four tasks was 3s per image. The limitation was not because of CNN, but due to selective search which takes approximately 2s to generate candidate region proposals. One forward pass through the HyperFace network takes only 0.2s.
6 DISCUSSION
We discuss few crucial observations from our experiments. First, all the face related tasks benefit from using the multitask learning framework. The gain is mainly due to the network’s ability to learn more discriminative features, and post-processing methods which can be leveraged by having landmarks as well as detection scores for a region. Secondly, fusing intermediate layers improves the performance for structure dependent tasks of pose estimation and landmarks localization, as the features become invariant to geometry in deeper layers of CNN. The HyperFace exploits these observations to improve the performance for all the four tasks.
We also visualize the features learned by the HyperFace network. Figure 13 shows the network activation for a few selected feature maps out of 192 from the convall layer. It can be seen that some feature maps are dedicated solely for a single task while others can be used to predict different tasks. For example, feature map 27 and 186 can be used for face detection and gender recognition, respectively. The former distinguishes the face and non-face regions whereas the latter outputs high activation for the female faces. Similarly, feature map 19 shows high activation near eyes and mouth regions, while feature map 96 gives a rough contour of the face orientation. Both of these features can be used for landmark localization and pose estimation tasks.
Several qualitative results of our method on the AFW, PASCAL and FDDB datasets are shown in Figure 14. As can be seen from this figure, our method is able to simultaneously perform all the four tasks on images containing extreme pose, illumination, and resolution variations with cluttered background.
7 CONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented a multi-task deep learning method called HyperFace for simultaneously detecting faces, localizing landmarks, estimating head pose and identifying gender. Extensive experiments using various publicly available unconstrained datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on all four tasks. In future, we will evaluate the performance of our method on other applications such as simultaneous human detection and human pose estimation, object recognition and pedestrian detection.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research is based upon work supported by the Office of the Director of National Intelligence (ODNI), Intelligence
Advanced Research Projects Activity (IARPA), via IARPA R&D Contract No. 2014-14071600012. The views and conclusions contained herein are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as necessarily representing the official policies or endorsements, either expressed or implied, of the ODNI, IARPA, or the U.S. Government. The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for Governmental purposes notwithstanding any copyright annotation thereon.
